# DoctorX
###AngelHack Brooklyn: Esri Prize Winner ($1000)
##Summary
 Won the Esri Prize of $1000 with DoctorX, a machine learning platform for assistance to Alzheimer patients and the elderly. Alzheimer patients typically have poor money management which leads to excessive spending and tend to get lost and wander while driving. DoctorX uses GPS data and debit/credit card transaction data to train a machine learning model (primarily using Fuzzy C-means clustering and an underlying Hidden Markov model) that will track and measure early signs of Alzheimer’s. By leveraging existing data, we can provide an almost invisible way for early detection and the monitoring of a patient’s Alzheimer’s. Datasets from debit and credit card providers and GPS tracking datasets from cell phone carriers are used to identify anomalous data for a patient and predict early signs of executive function degradation. With the classification of a high probability of early stage Alzheimer’s, the output of this analysis could be sent to the primary care physician. The physician could use this information to guide the discussion on potential cognitive treatment, which could reduce cognitive deficiencies, and financially planning for long term care.


##Inspiration
Every second, massive amounts of digital data points are generated from our daily proceedings through credit card transactions and cellphone GPS locators. Countless more data remains uncollected. Recent advancements in machine learning have made it possible to use more than just aggregate data of large consumer population to improve early detection of diseases; early detection can occur faster and more reliably for Alzheimer’s patients.
This application is inspired by the an article in the New York Times, “Fraying at the Edges” by N.R. Kleinfield. Late 2012, Geri Taylor was looking into the mirror when she could not recognize her own face. As a former nurse and then health care executive, Ms. Taylor had seen all stages of Alzheimer’s in action. Yet her mishaps were initially attributed to the decline in memory from old age. Existing methods for detection of Alzheimer’s largely rely on the documentation of mental decline. By that time, Alzheimer’s has already caused severe brain damage to individuals. Early detection of cognitive impairments is clinically valuable as treatment is most effective before significant deterioration.
The Alzheimer’s Association identifies several early warning signs of Alzheimer’s. In particular, patients have been known to exhibit decreased or poor judgment in money management and get lost easily. Difficulty in managing money and disorientation are observable and measurable points to aid in early detection of Alzheimer’s. These things can be observed through existing data through the use of credit card transaction and GPS travel time data. As the speed of decline varies among individuals, greater anomalies in magnitude and frequencies of these behaviors can tracked. 
DoctorX serves as the invisible tracker for individuals over the age of 65 to collect and identify early signs of Alzheimer’s. A slick interface helps with the visualization of data which allows people to track deviations in spending patterns and travel time. The resulting data can be used for generating insights about: (1) when a patient needs to see a doctor, (2) early management and financial planning for full onset of Alzheimer’s, (3) ways of slowing down worsening of the condition; (4) and, measuring and monitoring how a patient’s conditions progresses.

##What it does
DoctorX uses GPS data, debit/credit card transaction data and machine learning to track and measure early signs of Alzheimer’s. By leveraging existing data, we can provide an almost invisible way for early detection and the monitoring of a patient’s Alzheimer’s. Datasets from debit and credit card providers and GPS tracking datasets from cell phone carriers are used to identify anomalous data for a patient and predict early signs of executive function degradation. With the classification of a high probability of early stage Alzheimer’s, the output of this analysis could be sent to the primary care physician. The physician could use this information to guide the discussion on potential cognitive treatment, which could reduce cognitive deficiencies, and financially planning for long term care. 

##What's next for DoctorX
As DoctorX begins to generate more robust datasets, we could increase our capability to derive insights about the interactions between a patient’s spending habits, travel time and the loss of executive function for a more accurate diagnostic tool for Alzheimer’s. Future machine learning applications that are already in the works include: (1) automated image-based classification, both cross-sectionally and longitudinally, to support diagnosis and monitor of preceding stages; (2) use of Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE) SensorTags to monitor key aspects of household appliances and a patient’s daily habits (3) variable selection machine learning models on clinical diagnosis and clinical dementia rating for accurate classification of cognitive impairments and reduction in  number of measures required for diagnosis.


